
PERQemu Serial Devices
======================


The emulator provides register-level emulation of the Z80 SIO chip used on all
of the PERQ I/O boards.  In particular the PERQ uses the SIO/2 variant, which is
as complicated to program as the NEC uPD765 floppy controller, so this document
describes the implementation details and extra nerdy stuff that isn't in the
User Guide, in case anyone cares.  Or so that I can come back to this in six
months and remember what the hell I did, and why!


Hardware: IOB/CIO
-----------------

The original PERQ sports a single RS-232 port with full modem control on channel
A, with speech output on channel B.  When the Kriz tablet was introduced, the
input half of channel B was enabled to allow the Kriz tablet to be hooked up to
a PERQ-1 in place of the larger and more expensive GPIB-connected BitPad.  Both
channels are wired for DMA transfers; reads and writes on the RS-232 port, and
writes (output) only on the Speech side.  On the IOB, a Z80 CTC (Clock/Timer
Controller) chip provides baud rate clocks.

On the original PERQ, the DCD pin is also used as a GPIO pin, wired to the 60Hz
AC line frequency to provide a "jiffy clock".  PERQemu doesn't emulate this, as
it seems that nearly all software that may have used it was abandoned very early
in favor of just using the video refresh to update the 60Hz system/software
clock insted.  (It could be implemented, if any software that uses it is found.)


Hardware: EIO
-------------

The PERQ-2 EIO board has two SIO chips, with two Intel i8254 PIT (Programmable
Interval Timer) chips providing the baud rate clocking.  As with the CIO board,
SIO "A" has a full featured RS-232 port on channel "A", with the same features
as the earlier I/O board.  The "B" side of the first SIO chip is connected to
Speech output, with an external kluge provided to select which active half of
the chip gets DMA service.  As with the IOB/CIO implementation, the Kriz tablet
(standard issue on PERQ-2 models) is wired for input to SIO "A", channel "B".

The second SIO chip provides another RS-232 port "B", also with modem control
but no DMA wiring -- it's strictly programmed I/O.  The "VT100-style" keyboard
that shipped with the PERQ-2 models uses SIO "B", channel "B" for input.  Don't
worry, there won't be a quiz later.  It's all wired together in the Z80System
implementations (CIOZ80.cs and EIOZ80.cs).


Code: What's Where
------------------

Because this low-level implementation is so involved, the files are grouped in
three main areas under Emulator/IO:

    Z80/
        All of the actual controller chips (CTC, PIT, SIO and MC3417)
        live here, as they are connected to the Z80's I/O bus and run
        entirely in the scope of the Z80System/thread.  Several C#
        relevant interface definitions are here too which provide
        connective tissue for the CTC and DMA controllers and clients.

    Ports/
        A complete rewrite of the Mono/C# System.IO.Ports.SerialPort
        class and its Stream implementation.  The original code is so
        notoriously broken that I finally gave up and just chucked it.
        PERQemu.IO.Ports.SerialPort is a stripped down, lean and mean
        rewrite of the aged Mono sources.  Or at least a good start.

    SerialDevices/
        The various PERQ serial peripherals live here: Kriz tablet,
        VT100 keyboard, and several flavors of RS-232 port:  NullPort
        is a sink used when the user doesn't configure or enable the
        host ports; RSXFilePort allows text file transfers to and from
        the emulator by pretending to be a PIP session on an RSX-11M
        host; RealPort is the full fat, full flavored RS-232 port that
        talks to a host serial port/device.


For those playing along at home, the ISIODevice interface was removed in a
simplification of the previous implementation.  An abstract SerialDevice class
now underlies both pseudo devices and real/physical host port devices.


Baud Rates
----------

For clock generation, the two controller chips are emulated:

    IO/Z80/Z80CTC.cs - Zilog Counter/Timer Chip (or its Mostek equivalent,
                       used on the PERQ IOB/CIO)

    IO/Z80/i8254.cs - Intel Programmable Interval Timer (EIO)

Both timer chips use the ICTCDevice interface to announce baud rate changes when
the Z80/PERQ reprograms them to set RS-232 baud rates or Speech output rates:

    RS-232 A (PERQ-1) - 300 to 9600 baud
    RS-232 A & B (PERQ-2) - 300 to 19200 baud
    Speech (all) - 16kHz or 32kHz (possibly others, but no software found)

The emulated devices ignore baud rate settings:

    NullPort - takes whatever the PERQ/Z80 sets, sinks all data
    RSXFilePort - runs at 9600 (PERQ-1) or 19200 (PERQ-2), fixed
    Kriz tablet - 32kHz, fixed (but see below)
    VT100 keyboard - 300 baud, fixed


For IOB (Z80 @ 2.4576Mhz) the CTC is programmed with these values (channel 0)
to generate the RS232-A port baud rate clock:

    Prescaler for timer: 16 (or 256)    2.4576Mhz = 407ns
    SIO driven @ 16x freq, so delta * 16 = bit rate, * 10 = char/irq rate
    
    9600    TC 1    delta 6512      -> 104192ns/bit or 1.042ms/char
    4800    TC 2    delta 13024     -> 208384ns/bit or 2.084ms/char
    2400    TC 4    delta 26048     -> 406768ns/bit or 4.168ms/char
    1200    TC 8    delta 52096     -> 833536ns/bit or 8.335ms/char
     600    TC 16   delta 104192    -> 1667072ns/bit, 16.670ms/char
     300    TC 32   delta 208384    -> 3334144ns/bit, 33.341ms/char
     150    TC 64   delta 416768    -> 6668288ns/bit, 66.682ms/char
     110    TC 87   delta 566544    -> 9064704ns/bit, 90.647ms/char

The EIO (Z80 @ 4Mhz) programs the PIT with the appropriately scaled values to
achieve the same rates, plus the 19200 baud which the faster RS-232 ports allow.
In addition, both implementations support the Speech rates of 16000 and 32000.
(The conversion routines are actually implemented in Controller/Conversion.cs.)

Note that the programming/constants used are taken directly from the PERQ's Z80
code; so far I've not found any examples of fully custom programming under POS
or Accent that strays from the approved/standard baud rates, and PNX uses the
standard Unix APIs.  If anyone wants to run a serial port at 942 baud, I'd love
to know why (and can recommend a good therapist).


SIO Implementation
------------------

The complex SIO chip is broken into three parts.  Three is the numbah:

    IO/Z80/Z80SIO.cs - top-level chip interface
    IO/Z80/Z80SIOChannel.cs - one individual channel
    IO/Z80/Z80SIORegisters.cs - all the CSR fiddly bits

The Z80SIO is attached to the Z80's IOBus and fields interrupts and DMA requests
for each instance of the chip.  On the EIO, it also implements the "switch"
that directs DMA requests to either the RS-232 "A" port or the Speech device;
only one can be doing "HiVol" I/O at a time (the Z80 firmware manages all this).
This is a PERQ-specific quirk and not part of the Zilog spec.

Each chip has two separate Z80SIOChannel objects to which peripherals may be
attached (outlined in detail below).  Each Channel now instantiates a Registers
object that handles all the fussy bit fiddling for the SIO's read and write
registers which are used to program the (mostly) independent channels.  The
Z80SIO "parent" acts as a pass-through for reading/writing commands and
data, but coordinates the somewhat complicated interrupt/vector generation that
the Z80 interacts with.  (I'm not going to delve into all that wackiness here;
the masochistic among you can read the code and datasheet.)


NB: the Channel object faithfully emulates the hardware's FIFOs: three bytes on
the receive side, and one byte for transmit.  (In the SIO chip these are fuzzy,
as the character currently being shifted in or out kind of counts, and all sorts
of shenanigans about sync character matching and CRC generation also apply, but
that is so far into the weeds that we'll ignore it for now.)  What this means is
that the emulated devices may/can add their own buffering to help smooth out the
variability of emulation speed of the host.  But the Z80 itself _also_ provides
ring buffers for that purpose, so to draw a diagram of the flow of data into or
out of a serial device on the PERQ, from user program to the physical layer, is
a real tumble down the rabbit hole.


As of this writing (v0.9.x), each Channel monitors its transmit and receive (Tx
and Rx hereafter) enable bits and kicks off a polling loop with the Scheduler.
The original event-driven Mono/C# SerialPort class was so thoroughly broken that
a purely polled, non-blocking approach was taken with the rewrite.  This has the
side benefit that serial I/O to the "real" ports is handled entirely on the Z80
thread, so the elimination of locks more than offsets the polling overhead.  At
least that's how it seems in initial testing so I'm gonna call it a win. :-)

Each SerialDevice (IO/SerialDevices/SerialDevice.cs) informs the SIO of its
desired polling rate:  for "pseudo devices" that only care about receiving or
transmitting data within the "virtual time" domain of the emulator (i.e., the
Kriz tablet or keyboard) the current baud rate is used.  A "real" device such as
a host serial port or the Speech device can specify an independent polling rate
so that data from the host can be moved to and from the virtual machine.


I Did Not Need To Know That
---------------------------

The PERQ allows programming _separate_ Tx and Rx baud rates by giving the RS-232
"A" channel two different clock inputs.  The Z80 SIO chip also supports setting
the number of bits per character _differently_ for Tx and Rx, so in theory you
could use the POS (and Accent) register-level programming interface to set up
8-bit input characters and 7-bit output characters.  WHY?  I have no idea.  But
somebody, somewhere in the 1970s thought "oh yeah, we should do that."  Drugs,
probably.

Similarly, the SIO has a range of options for synchronous modes, so if you want
to do SDLC or HDLC with CRC-16 generation and all that jazz, you can program it;
FOR NOW, the emulator quietly ignores almost all of it.  Only the parts needed
by the Kriz tablet (which uses a half-assed sync mode, thankfully) are actually
implemented.  IN THEORY, there's a PERQ 3270 communications package that *may*
use some of the exotic programming modes, but I don't have any IBM hardware to
connect to and test it.  Send me something and I'll add support?  Sure.

To deal with the variability in emulation speed and the difficulty of changing
baud rates using the old Mono/C# SerialPort class reliably, the RS-232 ports are
configured using Settings commands to run at a fixed rate; changes to parity,
baud rate, data or stop bits, or even handshaking mode are quietly ignored by
the SIO implementation and not propagated to the host.  This may change!

Just because this has to be noted somewhere:  the SIO chip encodes stop bits in
two bits in the middle of Write Register 4.  Windows, Unix and C#/Mono all use
slightly different encodings (StopBits enum) so the mapping is:

        StopBits    SIO     Win32    Unix
          enum      WR4      API    termios
None        0        0        -        -        (not legal)
One         1        1        0        0
Two         2        3        2        2
OnePtFive   3        2        1        2        (termios: only if 5 data bits)

Madness.  Partly to deal with this (and plenty of other) craziness, I split the
register handling off into a separate class because the Channels was approaching
1,000 lines and getting increasingly tangled with all of the nutty operational
modes that the chip provides.  History will vindicate me, surely.


Device Implementations
======================

VT-100 Keyboard
---------------

IO/SerialDevices/SerialKeyboard.cs implements the interface from the SDL UI to
the SIO chip.  It runs at a fixed 300 baud, 8/N/1.  The Z80 code implements a
ring buffer to provide some type-ahead and try to prevent overruns, but if your
emulation host can't run at 60fps you may encounter dropped characters.  (My old
test Mac, unfortunately, suffers this; in case I'm not the only person on Earth
running this on a "slow" machine I may quietly add a Setting for boosting the
polling rate.  TBD.)

This is the simplest of the serial devices; it only receives, doesn't poll, and
ignores all configuration changes.


SerialMux Device
----------------

This is a fake device that allows two separate devices to share a single SIO
channel.  PERQ I/O boards all wire the Kriz tablet as a receive-only device,
while the Speech device is transmit-only, sharing the "B" side of the first SIO
chip.  SerialMux.cs is extremely simple, just routing data to or from each
sub-device; these are described in detail below.


Kriz Tablet
-----------

Some background information about the Kriz tablet is in the UserGuide.  It's the
default pointing device on the PERQ-2 machines, but it could also be interfaced
to the PERQ-1 and later versions of the Z80 firmware support it.  See the User
Guide for info about OS support, etc.

[This section preserves some of the verbose commentary from KrizTablet.cs.]

The Kriz tablets send updates every 1/60th of a second to the Z80 on SIO port B
at a fixed baud rate of 32kHz.  It uses a sort-of-synchronous mode of the chip,
with the following data format (from v8.7 ROM, with updates from "kriz.doc"):

    ; Byte0<7:0> = sync char (filtered out by SIO B hardware)
    ; Byte1<7>   = ValidMsg bit (0)
    ; Byte1<6>   = TabOffTablet (1 -> mouse off tablet)
    ; Byte1<5>   = Landscape (1 -> landscape tablet)
    ; Byte1<4>   = unused (0)
    ; Byte1<3:0> = high bits of X
    ; Byte2<7:0> = low X
    ; Byte3<7:5> = Switches (right, middle, left)
    ; Byte3<4>   = unused (0)
    ; Byte3<3:0> = high bits of Y
    ; Byte4<7:0> = low Y

The Sync char transmitted is 0x81 (for CIO, active low) or 0x7e (EIO).  Some
"junk" pad bytes are tacked on here because, as the ROM explains:

    ; Note: A complete msg is only 4 chars.  But we count 2 extra chars
    ; and just throw them away.  This was done to overcome problem we had
    ; with SIO internal operation on Sync recognition when it is programmed 
    ; back into Hunt mode below.

Evidently nobody read the Z80 SIO datasheet, because in sync mode the chip is
supposed to transmit two CRC bytes *after* reception of a second flag byte --
but we would have to disassemble the embedded i8748 ROM or snoop an actual Kriz
serial bitstream to find out if it's actually sending one.  No matter; since
our SIO implementation doesn't (yet?) compute and insert a CRC at the end of
the message or flag CRC errors in the status bits, we just send extra NULs when
the device is polled.  Problem solved! :-)

[Note that the ICL T2 Service guide says 90 updates per second, but that made no
difference to PNX, and 60 is plenty smooth for every other OS.]

The Z80 then reformats the "raw" packets from the Kriz into a 5-byte packet to
send to the PERQ; see Pointer.{CIO,EIO} or the old v87.z80 (original IOB) code
for more info.  Also from v87.z80:
    
    ; Note: Tablet data is active low.

This is useful information as it turns out, although it is NOT the case for EIO!

The "fudge factors" for applying cursor offsets (io_private.pas):

    { Fudge factors for Kriz Tablet. }
    KrizXfudge = 64;        { actual range of X is 0..895 }
    KrizYfudge = 1087;      { actual range of Y is 0..1151 }
                            { of TX, TabAbsX: 0..895  }
                            { of TX, TabAbsY: 0..1151 }
                            { of TabRelX: -64..831    limited to 0..767 }
                            { of TabRelY: 1087..-64   limited to 1023..0 }


In a bit of an "own goal" by 3RCC, the Kriz shares a baud rate clock with the
Speech device.  When audio playback is scheduled at 16kHz, the mouse pointer
"wigs out" as the sync character and mouse position data packets are garbled by
the baud rate change.  Most audio applications turn off mouse tracking, play the
sound, then reset the baud rate and re-enable.  Sigh.  The emulator does _not_
currently reproduce this effect, though for strict accuracy maybe it should?

To support the Kriz, the SIO implements the basic 8-bit sync character matching
when programmed for "hunt mode."  It does NOT implement 16-bit sync, SDLC/HDLC
aborts, CRC generation, over/underrun detection and sync char injection, etc.
Since the PERQ/Z80 doesn't use any of that, we don't bother with it.

The Kriz, if configured, is attached to the Rx side of the SerialMux device.


Speech
------

All PERQs support a limited form of audio output.  Most of the documentation
calls this the "Speech" device; a Motorola MC3417 Continuously Variable Slope
Delta Modulator (CVSD) chip decompresses 8-bit data streams into an op-amp that
drives a speaker in the display cabinet for a 16kHz, mono output stream.  This
is now emulated by PERQemu by converting the bytes sent to the Speech channel to
16-bit signed PCM samples, delivered to the host's default audio device via the
SDL2 output routines.

IO/Z80/MC3417.cs converts the 8-bit CVSD data to 16-bit PCM.  For each byte sent
to the device, 8 samples are generated and queued for output.  Baud rate changes
are also forwarded once the internal sampler state is updated.  This device is
attached to the Tx side of the SerialMux.  It operates in the VM's time domain.

UI/SDL/Speaker.cs interfaces with the SDL library.  It handles all of the device
setup and buffering of the output samples for some measure of efficiency.  This
part of the interface operates in the host/realtime domain.  Of course, this is
tricky to handle on slower hosts that can't run the emulation at full speed.

There is a measurable impact on performance when the audio playback is active,
as high as 20-30% higher CPU usage in aggregate across the active cores as
measured on Linux.  (PERQemu dedicates a main thread to the UI, a CPU thread,
and a Z80 thread; there may also be timers, Ethernet, or thread pool activity
that makes it hard to isolate the impact of audio, but on a quad-core CPU it's
not hard to see.)

Thus, PERQemu detects "silence" and pauses the device when no output from the
PERQ is present.  For slow hosts that can't keep up with the playback rate, two
additional strategies are employed:

    When paused, playback doesn't begin until the sample buffer is full;
    subsequently the buffer is pushed into the SDL audio queue when at
    1/2 to 1/4 capacity.  For a buffer of 2K samples, this gives a "head
    start" of around .128 seconds, with 512-1K blocks of samples streamed
    to try to prevent gaps and stuttering;

    The system's overall emulation rate is computed based on video refresh
    and the SIO's polling rate is effectively "cheated" so that the audio
    can keep up.  This may/will be set via the RateLimit Settings (as with
    the Keyboard polling rate) so that slow hosts can run more smoothly,
    with a minor reduction in emulation accuracy.  Much as I hate to say it,
    at some point you really do just have to throw hardware at it...
    

Note that the CIO/EIO implementation of the Z80 firmware ALSO does buffering,
and in fact uses two RAM buffers to manage DMA of new incoming "HiVol" samples
from the PERQ while the Z80 DMA ships the other buffer to the SIO chip.  So if
you're running (or writing :-) a PERQ application that produces audio, there
may be a very slight latency under emulation that isn't present on the hardware.

In operation things are a little bit tricky.  At 16kHz we should receive 2000
bytes/sec in CVSD samples (some music demos run at 32kHz, or 4000 bytes/sec).
The SDL2 routines provide their own variable length buffering with depth only
limited by system RAM, but we try to avoid unrealistic playback rates as it can
throw off emulation if it isn't at least reasonably accurate.

Note that PERQemu also relies on SDL2 to "magically" do the up-sampling needed
to convert 16kHz mono to the more typical 44.1kHz or 48kHz (usually stereo)
formats used today.  Thus, under the covers the SDL2 library provides its own
stream implementation that buffers the incoming data in order to interpolate
and convert the samples to the actual host output format.  

An Example
----------

Assuming the SDL audio device is paused and the Speaker has a 2K sample buffer,
here's how this works (in theory):

    On EIO, the Z80 sets will ship up to 512 bytes in a DMA transaction,
    with the SIO pacing the output to the MC3417 at 1 byte every .5ms
    (the IOB has less Z80 RAM to work with so it uses smaller ring buffers
    to push speech data but the interface is the same);
       
    Because the Z80 has to ping pong the baud rate between the 32kHz Kriz
    tablet and the (usual) 16kHz audio output rate, the Speaker buffers
    the baud change notifications until the first samples arrive; at that
    point if it has to change the output rate, it closes and reopens the
    host device with the correct settings;

    Before starting the initial playback, Speaker waits until the buffer
    is full; with the default 2K sample buffer, this gives the Z80 a .128
    second head start.  Subsequently the threshold is dropped to 512 samples
    per copy, hopefully striking the right balance between smooth playback,
    startup latency, and acceptably low overhead of doing too many managed ->
    unmanaged buffer copies;


There's nothing in the PERQ firmware/protocol to signal the end of playback.
The data just stops showing up.  The SIO's polling function is used to detect
this and make sure that residual samples in the Speaker's buffer AND in the SDL2
stream buffer are properly flushed.  Once idle, the device is paused.

An obvious fly in the ointment is when a short sample such as a system "beep" is
played: if it isn't at least one full buffer long, it won't play until enough
additional samples are queued up, which might be seconds or minutes later!  The
polling function accounts for this case as well.

There is quite a bit of testing and tuning to do, so some of the debugging knobs
are still present in the code.  Additional settings may be added, such as the
ability to tune the buffer sizes or force "stereo" output (some people may find
it odd or off-putting to have sound in one ear; some OSes just automatically
convert mono by copying the output to both channels).


NullPort
--------

There are three possible devices that can be attached to an SIO channel that do
RS-232 emulation:  the first of these is NullPort.cs, a simple data sink.  When
a PERQ is configured without enabling the host port(s), the appropriate channels
are assigned a NullPort so that the Z80 "sees" a device that it's expecting, but
transmitted bytes go off into the void and nothing is ever received.


RSXFilePort
-----------

Josh wrote this pseudo-device as a quick way to upload or download text files
from the emulator way, way back in the early days.  Most versions of POS can
recognize the "RSX:" device, which is what's emulated here: it pretends that a
PDP-11 running RSX-11M is on the other end of the line, and spoofs the weird
PIP protocol used to copy files over the serial port.  So if you don't happen
to have a real PDP-11 handy, assigning/enabling RSX: as the serial device on
port "A" enables this.

There's a ton of commentary in IO/SerialDevices/RSXFilePort.cs, and in the User
Guide.  

The only implementation notes here are that the emulated RSX: device can only be
assigned to port "A" (POS doesn't recognize it on port "B" on PERQ-2s), and it
runs at the fixed max baud rate of the virtual machine (so 9600 baud for PERQ-1,
19200 baud for PERQ-2s).  If you really, really want to transfer a file at 1200
baud for some reason, I don't know what to say.  "Slow food" is a thing.  Is
there a "slow serial" movement out there too? :-)


RealPort
--------

The User Guide describes how to set up and use the PERQ's RS-232 ports; here's
a recap with additional background into the implementation:

    A host device is configured in the Settings subsystem, then enabled
    for use with a particular Configuration[*];

    The host's transfer parameters are fixed, and are decoupled from the
    PERQ's settings for baud rate, parity, data/stop bits, and handshaking;

    One port (RS-232 "A") on all PERQ types is DMA-capable, so if you want
    to do high-speed be sure to attach to that one; port "B" on PERQ-2s is
    purely programmed I/O;

    Both ports support full modem control and hardware handshaking, in
    theory, but there is a *lot* of testing to do before confidently 
    asserting this as true.  Initially, anyway.


[*] Part of the reason for this split is that some crappy/cheapo USB-to-serial
bridge adapters don't always support the full range of baud rates or can be used
with a real RS-232 breakout box (low voltage).  As I don't have an army of
generous Patreons to buy me better test gear, I've had to make due, although I
am able to test between Linux and Windows using cheap Dell PCs that have actual
DB-9 COM ports on the back.  Comical stack of 9->25->null modem adapters aside,
at least it's better than nothing.  (A better quality FTDI cable should be on
the way shortly.)


RealPort.cs is the intermediary between the emulator/SIO and a host device. This
is a little bit convoluted and may be streamlined; for now, a SerialPort object
(SerialPort.cs) is instantiated to wrap the underlying "stream":

    ISerialStream.cs defines the interface between SerialPort and the
    platform/OS-specific implementations;

    UnixSerialStream.cs is the rewritten wrapper around the Unix termios
    library exposed by the MonoPosixHelper DLL for Mac and Linux;

    WinSerialStream.cs is the stripped-down Windows interface, using native
    Win32 calls but with most of the broken behavior mitigated.

SerialPort.cs provides a configurable buffer between the VM and the host; this
is independent of any driver-level buffering the OS may do.  The polling rate
for the host is computed based on the host-side baud rate selected; to keep this
reasonable, the Settings command limits the host to 38400 baud, which is faster
than any baud rate the PERQ supported.

The strategy is to poll the host up to 16 characters at a time, or approximately
every 4-8ms, doing non-blocking reads to quickly capture incoming data up to the
internal buffer size.  The aim is to not rely on "deep buffers" in the OS or
platform driver and to smooth-out delivery of characters to and from the virtual
PERQ.  The exchange of data from host buffers to the SIO is always character-by-
character, using the pacing of the SIO's programmed Rx/Tx rates according to the
"virtual time" clock of the emulator's Scheduler.  In this way, the virtual PERQ
only deals with interrupts at the rates it expects.  If the host can't run the
VM at full speed, the [expectation is] host's driver will apply the configured
handshaking OR the overrun will be reported up the chain to the SIO/Z80/PERQ and
the original software's error handling will deal with it.

That's the theory, anyway.  "Flow control" is going to be extremely difficult to
test and qualify; for now, the SIO passes control bits for DTR and RTS through
to the stream, and reports back DCD, DSR and CTS to the VM.  It remains TBD if a
fully "synthetic" flow control scheme should be implemented, where the SIO never
"sees" the real status of the pins.  One oddity is that the SIO's AutoEnables
"feature" uses DCD _as the receiver enable_ which leads to an obvious problem:
how do you talk to a modem that isn't connected if it doesn't raise DCD until a
connection has completed?  I have to fire up a Z80 SBC or a PERQ with a breakout
box and clarify that.  May need a "settings rs232a assert dcd true" perhaps? :-(

[As of this writing, the basic mechanisms are all in place and initial testing
to verify the Kriz, keyboard, Null/RSX/Real ports and Speech has been performed.
There is a LOT more work to test real transfers between two hosts through cross-
over cable (or modems! :-) or with an actual RS-232 printer.  Watch this space!]


Problems and Enhancements
-------------------------

Currently (on MacOS X anyway, untested elsewhere) if you yank out a USB-serial
cable while the emulator is running, the underlying device file is yanked out
from under the emulator and a fatal exception is thrown.  Wrapping EVERY bloody
call that touches the interface in try/catch blocks is ridiculous; the rewrite
attempts to capture return status from all of the underlying calls and throw
ONE exception that -- since this has been written specifically for the emulator
and not an API-compatible replacement -- I may try to invoke a MachineChanged
event, for which all the plumbing is already in place.  This would allow me to
gracefully shut down the active serial port without crashing the emulator.

Thus, in concert with the graceful handling of "fatal" errors, the obvious UI
enhancement will be to make the "configure enable rs232" command be dynamic, and
not require restarting the VM.


Much more testing is needed: on Linux and Windows, I haven't yet tried to use a
USB port as my test hosts have actual on-board serial ports!  On Mac, a new
(higher quality) FTDI cable behaves _much_ better than the cheap crappy one I
started with.  On all platforms, testing high volume transfers to see how the
emulator stands up in various flow control scenarios is needed, although I have
done some cursory testing with applications like Kermit can actually do 8-bit
binary transfers properly and the new approach seems promising.

Finally, the User Guide needs to be updated with all of these developments!


---
Last update: skeezics   Fri Mar 27 14:29:58 PDT 2026
